Change the document structure (first cut) (#9)
klassert/eesp-ikev2: eesp-ikev2.org

improvements address evolving requirements in modern IPsec
deployments. EESP offers increased flexibility for hardware
offloads at the packet level. It supports carrying inner packet flow
identifiers for the use with ECMP, RSS hardware, and IPsec peers
prior to decryption. EESP also enables the establishment of Sub SAs 
with independent keys and sequence number spaces. Additionally, it
supports the use of 64-bit sequence numbers transmitted in each
packet or the omission of sequence numbers when the Replay Protection 
service is not needed. EESP packets carry a version number, enabling 
easier support for future extensions.

This document specifies the negotiation of EESP Security
Associations (SAs) within the Internet Key Exchange Protocol
Version 2 (IKEv2) protocol [RFC7296]. It details the creation,
rekeying, and deletion of EESP SAs, as well as the negotiation of
EESP specific transforms and properties.

The extensions defined here enables EESP SAs to coexist with ESP SAs, 
while introducing new capabilities to enhance IPsec's performance 
and versatility in modern use cases.

EESP Sub SA is an unidirectional SA derived from

> the same-direction Child SA from a pair of Child SAs negotiated using

Author: Inherited?

> the same-direction Child SA from a pair of Child SAs negotiated using

Author: Otherwise your text is fine (better than mine). I can live with "derived" too.

> the same-direction Child SA from a pair of Child SAs negotiated using

Reviewer: I can live with it too. I just feel it implies that we first create that EESP SA and then derive the Sub SAs from it. But as I understand it, all the Sub SAs, including the one with Session ID 0, which I guess would be that EESP SA, are basically equal. There is no parent-child relationship (in particular not in regards to the key material). They just all share the negotiated properties, but all have their own key material and state.

> the same-direction Child SA from a pair of Child SAs negotiated using

Reviewer 2: I think this concept is bit hard to explain. We can try to improve it.  Still I think : 
Derived SA –  creating new SA based on existing ones, using information from an initial SA negotiation is what we are doing. And new SA's life cycle is connected to the old one. Inherited may mean different lifcyle. end/rekey separately.

> the same-direction Child SA from a pair of Child SAs negotiated using

Author: Agree. Will try to make it more clear.
Jut want to check that our understanding is the same:
1) Sub SAs are used in EESP SA to actually protect traffic. 
2) At least one Sub SA (with ID 0) always exists (it is assumed when EESP SA is created). This will influence the semantics of the EESP_MAX_SUB_SAS notify. I think that it should in this case contain the maximum Sub SA ID the incoming Sub SAs can have. Thus, value 0 would mean that incoming Sub SAs ID cannot be other than 0 (meaning only one Sub SA is allowed).
3) In this case the negotiation of SSKDF should be mandatory (otherwise key material fo traffic protection cannot be derived).

> the same-direction Child SA from a pair of Child SAs negotiated using

Reviewer: My understanding so far was that if Sub SAs are not used (i.e. the `EESP_MAX_SUB_SAS` is not sent by the initiator or not returned by the responder, or if no SSKDF is negotiated), the key derivation is the same as for ESP. Kinda like a legacy mode to not complicate implementations if they don't support Sub SAs.

> IKEv2. Each Sub SA derives its own unique encryption key and 

Author: Agree.

# [VS] For this reason it is referenced in G-IKEv2 draft, which uses 
# [VS] not-yet-assigned name for this transform
# [VS] But by the time this draft would be published, the 
# [VS] ikev2-rename-esn will most probably become an RFC and IANA 
# [VS] completes the renaming,
# [VS] thus we can just reference the IANA registry
# This document uses the following terms defined in
# [[I-D.ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-rename-esn]] : Replay Protection.

# [VS] I'd rather to put off all the group SA stuff 
# This document uses the following terms defined in
# [[I-D.ietf-ipsecme-g-ikev2]]: Sender-ID, Data-Security SA,
# GWP_SENDER_ID_BITS, GCKS policy.

* EESP Overview

** EESP Version

Each EESP packet carries the EESP Base Header version, which is 
specified in Section [XXX] of [[I-D.klassert-ipsecme-eesp]]. EESP 
version determines the format of the EESP packet and its processing 
rules. The initial version specified in 
[[I-D.klassert-ipsecme-eesp]] is version 0.

** EESP Sub SA
Existing mechanisms for establishing Child SAs, as described in
[[RFC7296]], yield pair of SAs. High-speed IP traffic is often
asymmetric. Creating multiple pairs of Child SAs, e.g. [[RFC9611]] or

> for DSCP to carry asymetric traffic is inefficient. 

Author: Fixed thank you.

To deal with this limitations EESP introduces the concept of Sub SAs.
An EESP Sub SA is an unidirectional SA derived from
the same-direction EESP SA of the pair of SAs negotiated using
IKEv2. Each Sub SA derives its own keying material and 
maintains independent sequence number spaces and IV spaces from the 
parent Child SA; all other characteristics of Sub SAs (algorithms, 
traffic selectors etc.) are identical to the EESP SA they belong to. 

Each Sub SA is identified by a Sub SA Id, which is a number in the 
range from zero up to the maximum Sub SA ID indicated by the 
receiver of the Sub SA during EESP SA negotiation via IKEv2 (see  

> [[Announcing Maximum Number of Sub SAs]]). The Sub SA ID is carried 

Author: How about EESP_MAX_SUB_SA_ID?

in the Session ID field of the EESP base header (see Section [XXX] of 
[[I-D.klassert-ipsecme-eesp]]). The Sub SA ID MUST be unique for 

> all Sub SAs in the content of an EESP SA.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

#   narrow scope streamlines both key management and policy
#   enforcement.
# 
# - On-the-Fly Key Derivation: Implementations using hierarchical
#   key derivation, particularly with hardware offload, MAY derive
#   Sub SA keys dynamically on a per-packet basis. This mitigates
#   the risk of data-plane performance degradation caused by a large
#   number of keys [[I-D.ponchon-ipsecme-anti-replay-subspaces]].
# 
# AEAD transforms such as AES-GCM [[RFC4106]], [[RFC8750]] require
# that the IV never repeat within a single Sub SA. Because each
# Sub SA uses a distinct key, the IV MAY be reused across different
# Sub SAs, satisfying the requirement that each key be paired with a
# unique IV. Implementations MUST also maintain an independent
# sequence number space for each Sub SA when full 64-bit sequence
# numbers are in use. For a given Sub SA key, sequence numbers MUST
# remain unique and monotonically increasing to meet cryptographic
# requirements.

** EESP Sequence Numbers

Unlike ESP, EESPv0 header allows to transmit 64-bit sequence numbers.
In addition, the Sequence Number field in the EESPv0 header is 
optional and can be omitted from the packet if replay protection 

> service is not needed. Note, that while possible, disabling the 

Author: OK.

can be achieved if ESP SPIs are selected in such a way, that the most 
significant bit of the ESP SPIs is always set to zero.

# [VS] From my recollection of the discussion during the last call, 
# [VS] we decided that Cryp Offset is carried in the EESP header and 
# [VS] there is no need to negotiate it. Correct me if I'm wrong, for 
# [VS] now I'd rather delete the related text

# * EESP Crypt Offset Option
# This option is typically used for within one Datacenter use case
# such as [[PSP]]. To negotiate, the initiator sends USE_CRYPTOFFSET
# together with USE_TRANSPORT_MODE and the responder respond with the
# same. USE_EESP_CRYPTOFFSET is not supported in Tunnel mode or BEET
# mode.
# Note STK: This needs discussion
# #
# ~NOTE~ Add EESP draft UDP section reference.

*** UDP Encapsulation of Sub SAs

An EESP SA primarily uses UDP encapsulation to facilitate NAT
traversal. However, an additional use case for UDP encapsulation is
to introduce source port entropy, which supports ECMP or/and
RSS (Receive Side Scaling) mechanisms. In such scenarios, the
initiator MAY also use a distinct, ephemeral source port for
Sub SA IDs greater than zero. Both peers MAY independently select

> different source ports for the same Sub SA ID.

Author: I think this is Antony's text. I also don't quite understand it. I've commented it out for now, perhaps Antony can clarify what was the intent and then we can re-phrase it.

# those negotiated when the SA was initially established.

# ** Deleting EESP SA with INFORMATIONAL Exchange

# EESP SA always exist in pairs. Deleting EESP SA follows the same
# procedure as deleting Child SA using IKEv2 INFORMATIONAL exchange as
# specified in Section 1.4.1 [[RFC7296]]

# * EESP SA Transforms
# EESP introduces several transform properties that are negotiated
# during the establishment of an EESP SA. These properties MUST be
# identical for the duration of the SA. When the SA is rekeyed,
# the new SA MUST inherit all EESP transform properties negotiated for
# the original EESP SA.
# 
# | Type | Description               | Used In | Reference       |
# |------+---------------------------+---------+-----------------+
# | TBD6 | EESP Session ID(EESPSID)  |  (EESP) | [this document] |

** Announcing Maximum Number of Sub SAs

In the process of establishing the EESP SA, each peer MAY inform the 
other side about the maximum number of Sub SAs that it can 
handle as a receiver. This is not a negotiation and the maximum 
number (as well as the actual number) of Sub SAs can be different in 
different directions.

> A new notify status type EESP_MAX_SUB_SAS (<TBD3>) is defined by 

Author: Renamed. I also think the RESERVED is not needed in this notify. I will delete it, we can get it back if I missed something.

appear in all capitals, as shown here.

** Terminology
It is assumed that readers are familiar with IKEv2 
[[RFC7296]], IPsec architecture [[RFC4301]] and ESP [[RFC4303]].
This document uses a notation and conventions from IKEv2 [RFC7296].

# [VS] Well, this list is for sure not complete
# [VS] We also use "a lot" from RFC 7296, perhaps no need to 
# [VS] emphasize these particular terms
# [VS] I'd rather to delete this, above we assume that readers are 
# [VS] familiar with IKEv2 # This document uses the following terms 
# [VS] defined in IKEv2 [[RFC7296]]:
# Child SA, CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange, IKE_AUTH exchange,
# USE_TRANSPORT_MODE

# [VS] I wonder whether we need to reference PSP for this
# [VS] If we do, then PSP should be a normative reference
# [VS] I think we'd rather to avoid this and re-define these things

> # [VS] here. BTW, VNI is not used in the text

Author: I think that it first should be defined in the core EESP draft and then evaluated whether IKEv2 can be used to negotiate  PSP-like mode of EESP.

# [VS] See note above. This should either be a normative reference
# [VS] And we use a different term - Sub SA. "Sub-Child SA" is not
# [VS] used in the text. I'd rather to delete this
# This document uses the following terms defined in
# [[I-D.mrossberg-ipsecme-multiple-sequence-counters]]: Sub-Child SA.

# [VS] This is the name of transform, I don't think we should 
# [VS] reference ikev2-rename-esn here
# [VS] ikev2-rename-esn is only relevant *now* until it becomes an 
# [VS] RFC and IANA updates IKEv2 registries
# [VS] For this reason it is referenced in G-IKEv2 draft, which uses 
# [VS] not-yet-assigned name for this transform
# [VS] But by the time this draft would be published, the 
# [VS] ikev2-rename-esn will most probably become an RFC and IANA 
# [VS] completes the renaming,
# [VS] thus we can just reference the IANA registry
# This document uses the following terms defined in
# [[I-D.ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-rename-esn]] : Replay Protection.

# [VS] I'd rather to put off all the group SA stuff 
# This document uses the following terms defined in
# [[I-D.ietf-ipsecme-g-ikev2]]: Sender-ID, Data-Security SA,
# GWP_SENDER_ID_BITS, GCKS policy.

* EESP Overview

** EESP Version

> Each EESP packets carry EESP Base Header version, which is specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each EESP packet carries the EESP Base Header version, which is specified
```

Author: OK.

in Section [XXX] of [[I-D.klassert-ipsecme-eesp]]. This SHOULD be 
negotiated using IKEv2. Each Base Header version, to be able to 
negotiate via IKEv2, SHOULD have a corresponding ~IKEv2 Security 

> Protocol Identifiers~ The initial version sepecified EESPv0 (TBD1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protocol Identifiers~ The initial version specified is EESPv0 (TBD1)
```

I wonder why this would be SHOULD. Is that indented for authors of future versions/extensions? Because for an implementer of this protocol, how could it be SHOULD if we define the only way to negotiate it is with proposals  that carry the new IPsec protocol identifier we define? Maybe that part of the text should be placed in the EESP draft?

Author: This text was copy-pasted from early version, it needs to be edited. I agree that SHOULD is wrong here. The EESP version is negotiated as part of the negotiated process, it cannot be skipped, thus no "MUST", "SHOULD", "MAY" cannot be used here.

** EESP Sub SA
Existing mechanisms for establishing Child SAs, as described in
[[RFC7296]], yield pair of SAs. High-speed IP traffic is often
asymmetric. Creating multiple pairs of Child SAs, e.g. [[RFC9611]] or
for DSCP to carry asymetric traffic is inefficient. A pair of Child 
SA combined with multiple unidirectional a set of Sub SAs with Sub 

> SA IDs greater than 0, provides a more flexible approach to carrying

Reviewer: Similar to my comment above, I feel the term Child SA is not correctly used here. It's a pair of EESP SAs that are part of a single Child SA. And it's unclear to me what "combined with multiple unidirectional a set of" is supposed to mean.

Author: Hmm, this is an interesting question. I've been always thinking that Child SA is a generic name for IPsec SA (so that a ESP SA is a Child SA and an AH SA is a Child SA). Now I re-read RFC 7296 and I can see a support for your interpretation - that Child SA is a pair of ESP SAs or a pair of AH SAs. But there are also places in RFC 7296 that support my interpretation, like Section 2.8.1 that states: "At this point, there are three Child SA pairs between A and B (the old one and two new ones)" - in this case it counts an uni-direction ESP or AH SA as a Child SA.
Thus RFC 7296 is vague about this :-)

play packets with a different source address. Such an attacker could
disrupt the connection by replaying a single packet with a different
source address or port number.

** Explicit Initialization Vector

If the algorithm used to encrypt the payload requires cryptographic
synchronization data, e.g., an Initialization Vector (IV), then this
may be carried explicitly in every EESP packet.

** Implicit Initialization Vectors

With the Implicit Initialization Vector (IIV) encryption algorithm,
as specified in [[RFC8750]], the IV MUST be omitted in the EESP
packet. To enable this functionality, IIV transforms defined in
[[IKEv2-Enc]] MUST be used during negotiation. Furthermore,
the [[IKEv2-SN]] extension MUST be negotiated to support the use of
64-bit Sequential Numbers in EESP packets. If the the proposal
does not include 64-bit Sequential Numbers return error
NO_PROPOSAL_CHOSEN.

** Session ID

The Session ID is a multi-purpose attribute with mutually
exclusive values. The initiator MUST propose a single value in the
Child SA proposal, Transform EESPSSID (Value). The responder MUST
either accept the proposed value or reject it with an

> INVALID_SESSION_ID error message, indicating a supported value.

Reviewer: Hm, not sure about that negotiation. That seems to violate the Sub SA use case (or would the value be combined with the Sub SA ID?). And as discussed before, using transforms is also not ideal for this.

Author: This text is a leftover. It must be edited.

remain unique and monotonically increasing to meet cryptographic
requirements.

** EESP Sequence Numbers

Unlike ESP, EESPv0 header allows to transmit 64-bit sequence numbers.
In addition, the Sequence Number field in the EESPv0 header is optional
and can be omitted from the packet if replay protection service is not needed. 

# EESP provides an optional Replay service using
# 64-bit sequence numbers carried in the packet.

> # [VS] This should go to the Security Considerations

Author: Perhaps some words can be left here.

|----------+------------------+------------------+
| EESPv0   | ENCR, SN         | KE, SSKDF        |

# [VS} I assume we want to only allow AEAD ciphers for EESP, thus no INTEG transforms are allowed? Or not?
In case of EESPv0 for the ENCR transform type only
those transform IDs that define use of AEAD cipher mode are allowed.
Transform IDs that define pure encryption MUST NOT be used in the context of EESPv0.

# [VS] Discussion: perhaps we should which ciphers among the currently registered
# [VS] are OK for use in EESP.
# [VS] The use of these transforms should be specified somewhere
# [VS] Currently all transforms are specified for ESP (and some for IKEv2),
# [VS} My understanding is that for EESP a separate document
# [VS] similar to RFC 4309, RFC 7634 etc. should be created. In particular,
# [VS] it must specify the AAD for EESP (which is different than for ESP) IV format and nonce calculation 
# [VS] (these can be the same as for ESP).
# [VS] This can be done either in the core eesp document or in a separate draft, but not in this document, 
# [VS] since this is not concerned with IKEv2

Note, that 64-bit Sequential Numbers and None transform IDs are 

> meaningless for ESP and MUST NOT be used in ESP proposals.

Author: OK.

routed and prevents ambiguity in handling packets associated with
different Sub SAs when a NAT is present.

* EESP SA Negotiation in IKEv2

Current EESP specification [[I-D.klassert-ipsecme-eesp]] defines
version 0 of the EESP protocol. Consequently, this document limits 
its scope to only deal with EESPv0. If other EESP versions are 
defined in future, their negotiation using IKEv2 should be covered by 
separate documents.

EESP Security Associations (SAs) are negotiated in IKEv2 similarly 
to ESP SAs - as Child SAs in the IKE_AUTH or the CREATE_CHILD_SA 
exchanges. For this purpose a new Security Protocol Identifier EESPv0 
(<TBD1>) is defined. This protocol identifier is placed in the 

> Proposal Num field of the Proposal Substructure in the SA Payload 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protocol ID field of the Proposal Substructure in the SA Payload 
```

values.

The type of the Sub SA Key Derivation Function transform is <TBA2>.

*** New Transform IDs for Sequence Numbers Transform Type

This document defines two new Transfor IDs for the Sequence Numbers 
transform type: 64-bit Sequential Numbers (<TBD4>) and None (<TBD5>). 

To enable presence of sequence numbers in the EESP header the 
initiator MUST propose SN = (64-bit Sequential Numbers) in the
Proposal Substructure inside the Security Association (SA) payload. 
When the responder selects 64-bit Sequential Numbers, Sequence Number
field is included into the EESP header, that allows peers to 
achieve replay protection.

# NOTE STK: I'd say MUST above as we want to negotiate Anti-Replay 
# service and not just the presense of the seq nr field.

To disable sequence numbering, and thus replay protection based on
sequence numbers, the initiator MUST propose SN=None (<TBD5>). 
When the responder selects None, Sequence Number field is omitted
from the EESP header. 

# [VS] This para should go to the Security Considerations section
In this case the receiver SHOULD NOT dynamically modify ports or
addresses without using IKEv2 Mobility [[RFC4555]].

## Transforms Consistency

> IKEv2 limits trasform types that can appear in the Proposal 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IKEv2 limits transform types that can appear in the Proposal 
```

Author: More typoes :-)

> substructure based on its Protocol Num field (see Section 3.3.3 of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
substructure based on its Protocol ID field (see Section 3.3.3 of 
```

+---------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
!  Protocol ID  !   SPI Size    !      Notify Message Type      !
+---------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
!      Maximum Sub SA ID        |      RESERVED                 !
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
#+end_src

# [VS] Why do we need a RESERVED field here?

- Protocol ID (1 octet) - MUST be 0. MUST be ignored if not 0.
- SPI Size (1 octet) - MUST be 0. MUST be ignored if not 0.
- Notify Status Message Type (2 octets) - set to EESP_MAX_SUB_SAS 
(<TBD3>). 
# [VS] Why it is 16-bit and not 32-bit in size?
- Maximum Sub SA ID (2 octets, integer in network byte order) 
  -- specifies maximum value for the EESP Sub SAs the 
  sender of this notification expects to receive 

The maximum number of Sub SAs the sender of this notification can 
handle as a receiver is the value of the Maximum Sub SA ID 
field plus 1. For example, value 0 in the Maximum Sub SA ID field 

> means that only one Sub SA (with Subs SA ID = 0) can be handled.

Author: How so? Perhaps I poorly choose the words, but the intention was to emphasize, that to get maximum number of Sub SAs one should take the value from the Maximum Sub SA ID field and add 1. So, if the value there is 0, then the number of maximum Sub SAs is 1. And so on. Perhaps the text as follows:

The maximum number of Sub SAs the sender of this notification can 
handle as a receiver can be calculated as the value of the Maximum 
Sub SA ID field plus 1.

> means that only one Sub SA (with Subs SA ID = 0) can be handled.

Reviewer: You're absolutely right. Not sure what I was thinking :) Maybe I was too focused on the old name of the notify still and somehow read that as the calculation for the maximum SA ID. The proposed text might be a bit clearer.

Anyway, the start of the section is still a bit confusing as it says: "each peer MAY inform the 
other side about the maximum number of Sub SAs that it can handle as a receiver". However, it's not exactly the "maximum number of Sub SAs", but the "maximum Sub SA ID". And the documentation of the field currently also says "specifies maximum value for the EESP Sub SAs", it should probably say "specifies maximum value for the EESP Sub SA ID".

> means that only one Sub SA (with Subs SA ID = 0) can be handled.

Author: Fixed and added more clarifications.

# [VS] would require SSKDF to be a mandatory transform type for EESP.

If an SSKDF is selected as part of the proposal, instead of directly
taking keys for the Sub SAs from KEYMAT, as described in section 2.17
of [[RFC7296]], only one "root" key is taken for each EESP SA of the
Child SA. Their length is determined by the key size of the
negotiated SSKDF. The root key for the EESP SA carrying data from
the initiator to the responder is taken before that for the SA going
from the responder to the initiator.

# [VS] Discussion: perhaps the key derivation argument can be part 
# [VS] of the SSKDSF transform. In other words - definition of 
# [VS] a particular SSKDF would not only the specify KDF to use, but 
# [VS] also include its arguments. This would make key Sub SA 
# [VS] derivation more flexible (in future it can be defined over 
# [VS] other stuff than SPI + Session ID, e.g. over SN).
# [VS] Disadvantage - the SSKDF definition would become more 'heavy' 
# [VS] and in adding new SSKDFs would in theory be more difficult

# [VS] The Sub SA key derivation stuff should be moved to the eesp 
# [VS] draft. This key derivation is done inside EESP and is opaque 

> # [VS] for IKE

Reviewer: Yes, makes sense to move it there. The other things we can discuss.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to it keep it here. As a Child SA key derivation is part of IKE. 
Also, just like RFC 4303 does not specify nothing about the keys.  While IKEv1, IKEv2 and G-IKE specified their own KDF for ESP packets format specified in 4303.

Author: Child SA key derivation is part of IKE, but Sub SA key derivation is not. Sub SAs are created on the fly by kernel subsystem,  and the keys for them are calculated there. IKE is unaware of this process and does not care about it. IKE's role here is to negotiate SSKDF and provide the kernel subsystem with the "root" EESP SA key, that in case od Sub SAs will be the key for the SSKDF taken from KEYMAT (well, in fact two "root" keys for each EESP SA in different directions).
My point here is to place relevant things into the relevant documents. Most probably (at least with my experience) kernel and userland parts of the IPsec will be implemented by different persons. These persons will look at the relevant documents to see, what to do. EESP kernel person will most probably read only core eesp draft and IKE person will read only eesp-ikev2 draft (well, implementers are lazy, me included, and try not to read extra stuff). If we keep Sub SAs key derivation in this draft, then kernel person will have to read this draft and to filter out all the IKE-related things that he/she is not needed.

Reviewer: I agree with Valery. The IKE implementation is not concerned with the key derivation for individual Sub SAs. Its job is to derive the root keys and negotiating an SSKDF. The rest is handled by the EESP implementation. The public interface of the latter is similar to that for ESP in that a key is passed when installing an SA. And as with RFC 4303, it's not described in detail how that's derived, it could even be configured manually e.g. via `ip xfrm`. But additionally there is an optional SSKDF. So how that is employed to derive Sub SA keys from the root key (instead of directly using that key if no Sub SAs are used) should be defined in the EESP document.
